%!TEX root = ../main.tex

\chapter*{Conclusions and outlook}%
\label{chap:concl}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Conclusions and outlook}

In the course of this thesis work, a path has been drawn from the origins of the \gerda\
background model to a full study of the spectral shape of two-neutrino double-beta decay
events. In \cref{chap:bkg:raw:ph2}, the background model of \gerdatwo\ data before
analysis cuts has been presented to the reader, to demonstrate the accuracy of the Monte
Carlo predictions in reproducing the experimental data. The distribution of the background
in the region of interest for neutrinoless double-beta decay is shown to be uniform,
excluding two \g\ peaks, which are far enough from the Q-value. In
\cref{chap:bkg:lar:ph2}, it has been shown how propagation of optical photons is
implemented into the Monte Carlo framework in order to simulate the liquid argon veto
system. Thanks to this capability, the LAr veto flag has been computed for simulated
background events, and a background model of events after the LAr veto cut has been
developed. This last achievement allowed for a precision analysis of the two-neutrino
double-beta decay energy spectrum, both to measure the process half-life and to search for
new-physics phenomena. The experimental estimate of the two-neutrino double-beta decay
half-life $\thalftwoM = (\fillme{?} \pm \fillme{?}) \cdot 10^{21}$~yr is one of the most
precise measurements ever reported in the double-beta decay research field. Limits on
Majoron-emitting neutrinoless double-beta decay modes are set in the
$10^{22}$--$10^{23}$~yr range, competitive with recent experimental estimates by
\kamlandzen\ and EXO-200. The most stringent half-life lower limit of $\fillme{?} \cdot
10^{23}$~yr at 90\% C.L.~is set on the Majoron-emitting double-beta decay modes with
spectral index $n=1$. The latter converts to a lower limit on the coupling constant \ga\
of \fillme{?}--\fillme{?}~$10^{-5}$~GeV. A search for violations of the Lorentz symmetry
and CPT theorem effects is also performed on the two-neutrino double-beta decay spectrum.
No significant evidence of the spectral deformation is found, and a two-sided 90\%
C.L.~interval of $\fillme{?}~\text{GeV} < \aofM < \fillme{?}~\text{GeV}$ is placed on the
relevant coefficient within the Standard Model Extension.
\newpar
In conclusion of this research work, I would like to spend few words on learned lessons
and possible ideas on how to improve the quality of the science program in future
experimental efforts --- the LEGEND program, in particular. Building a Monte Carlo model
of the liquid argon veto has proven to be a challenging task. From one side, optical
specifications of materials commonly used in low-background cryogenic experiments are
poorly known in the vacuum ultra-violet regime. A serious problem is posed by the lack of
a precise measurement of the germanium reflectivity at the LAr scintillation light typical
wavelengths. Dedicated measurements campaigns by the LEGEND collaboration are ongoing.
Properties of liquid argon, e.g.~the attenuation length, should be also determined with
dedicated devices and monitored during data taking. Ideas on how to achieve this are also
being developed for the LEGEND experiment. From the other side, optical simulations are
exceptionally demanding from the computational point of view, on average CPUs. The issue
has been partly overcome by generating a light-detection probability map, that effectively
encapsulates the LAr veto model and can be applied to existing background simulations
obtained without photon tracking. Nevertheless, generating a single map requires tens of
thousands of CPU hours, and its characterization is therefore problematic. Experiments
in which massive simulations of optical processes are imperative (e.g.~\textsc{IceCube}
and JUNO), usually largely use Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) --- a possibility that
should be taken into serious consideration by the LEGEND collaboration.
\newpar


\chapendgliph{}

% vim: tw=90
